1. As the supreme favour should be considered the body (bestowed upon the bodhisattva, since
the Buddha-characteristics come therein to maturation) as well as the other things connected
with it; suprerne entrusting means that he does not loose either what he has obtained
or what he has not yet obtained (because he does not forsake the mahāyāna nor his endeavour
to be proficient in it).

2. the intention (āśaya) of benefitting others, which appears in his mind (and which aims at
illumination) is full of good qualities; it is fourfold:a) vast, (because when the bodhisattva
makes his vow, cittotpāda, his purpose is to lead to salvation all the living beings);b)
supreme, (because his aim is that aIl these beings should enter perfect nirvāṇa);c) absolute,
(because no being at all does in reality exist);d) not erroneous (because in case
he thinks of some being as existent he would no longer be a bodhisattva); it represents the
way of staying in this vehicle (of the gnosis).

Coming then to the explanation how the prajñāpāramitā should be practised, the text states that
the bodhisattva must practise the pāramitā of liberality without therefore taking anything
as real. But then, one may ask, why is here liberality alone mentioned when the pāramitās
are six?3. The six pāramitās are alluded to by the mere mention of liberality and this
on account of the character common to all of giving something, whether it bea) goods (āmiṣa);b)
protection (abhaya);c) the Law itself (dharma). The first contains only one element
viz, the giving itself; the second two, viz. observance of the moral rules and patience;
the third, three viz, energy, meditation and gnosis. Such a path is said to be a path which
has no hold on anything (apratiṣṭhita).

What is the meaning of: “not give a gift while fixing on an object”?4. No attachment:a) to one’s
own self as something really existent (implicit in vastu);b) to the expectation of a
reward for the good which has been done (implicit in kvacit, reward being lābha and satkāra)
andc) to the result of the good action which has been accomplished (implicit in rūpa).(This
suggests that) two things should be equally avoided: the non-practice of liberality (on
account of love to one’s own person), and the practice of it when it aims at something
else than right meditation.This explains how liberality should be practised.

The sūtra then explains the control of mind:5. a) the control of mind concerning the group of
the things to be considered under three different points of view (viz. as regards liberality
in itself, the person to whom liberality is shown and the donor, the three being equally
non existent);b) the keeping away of the mind from the assumption of the existence of
characters peculiar (to the things, as if they were existent);c) the elimination of the subsequent
doubts which may arise, one after the other, as regards the statement contained in
the text (chiefly that, if there is no liberality, no merit derived from it would be possible).

Somebody may ask: if the liberality is practised without believing in the existence of the things,
dharmas, how then can one practise it in the hope of obtaining Buddhahood? Therefore
the sūtra says: tat kiṃ manyase lakṣaṇa saṃpadā etc. “What do you think, Subhūti, is the
Buddha to he seen on account of the perfection of his signs etc.?” p. 22,1.1.

6. One may suppose that Buddhahood is something produced (on account of the merits of liberality
etc.); therefore, (in order to refute that assumption, here) it is excluded that perfection
consists in obtaining the signs (of the mahāpuruṣa), which are peculiar to the apparitional
body; in fact the dharmkāya being non-produced, no signs of mahāpuruṣa can be superimposed
on it. Therefore the sūtra says: yā sā lakṣaṇasaṃpat ... saivālakṣaṇasaṃpat p. 22,
l. 3), viz. Buddhahood is something different from the three characters (which are peculiar
to everything produced: origination, duration, destruction). In fact difference from
(viz, absence of) that triple character is said to be the Tathāgata (viz. the condition of
the Tathāgata is not produced).

[End of chapter 5]

These ideas (the practice of liberality etc. apratiṣṭhita and transcendence of the Buddha) are
so difficult to be grasped that, in future, when Buddhism will begin to decline, there
will hardly be people disposed to believe it (p. 22, 17).

7. This teaching of something very deep, along with the (peculiar notion) of cause and effect,
which is implicit in it, even in this cosmic age (yuga), the worst of all, is not fruitless,
because there are (even now) bodhisattvas possessed of the three necessary qualities
(good qualities, moral conduct and wisdom, guṇavantaḥ śīlavantaḥ prajñāvantaḥ, as it is said
at p. 22, l. 17).Asaṅga is now going to explain that sentence in the following kārikā.

8. Since, in their former existence, they have attended (the Buddhas) by means of the (triple)
training and have planted roots of moral merits in front of the Buddhas, other (than the
last one, these Bodhisattvas are said) to be possessed of moral conduct and of good qualities.Having
so explained why the sūtra calls these bodhisattvas śīlavantaḥ and guṇavantaḥ,
the A. passes on to explaining the third epithet: prajñāvantaḥ, possessed of wisdom.

9. They are also possessed of wisdom, because they have cut off any assumption as regards the
substantiality of dharmas as well as of any metaphysical entity in the beings. This assumption
is eightfold because its objects are eightfold, viz., as will be explained below, four,
assumptions concerning the metaphysical entity in beings: ātman, sattva, jīva, pudgala;
and four assumptions concerning dharmas: dharma , adharma, saṃjñā, asaṃjñā (p. 23, l. 7-8).
Therefore he adds:

10. The assumption of a metaphysical entity in the beings is fourfold; in fact it can be considereda)
as something existing apart from the five constituents of a person (ātman);b) as
a continuity of existence (sattva);c) as a duration up to the end of life (jīva);d) as a
clinging to a new form of existence (pudgala).As regards dharmas:

11. The assumption of dharmas is also fourfold (though no assumption of dharmas, dharmasaṃjñā,
is really possible), becausea) all dharmas are not existent (the notion of perceiver and
perceived being untenable); (on the other hand the assumption of no-dharma is impossible),b)
because there exists this non-existence) (as voidness, śūnya; nor assumption, saṃjñā,
is possible),c) because there is nothing of which something can be postulated; (but non assumption
is also impossible),d) because there is the conventional use of predicating something
of something.One may now ask why the bodhisattvas possessed of wisdom have been discussed
apart from those possessed of moral conduct and good qualities? The reply is found in
the fact that the bhūta-saṃjñā, viz. the assumption according to truth, is something distinct:

12. On account of four reasons, viz.:a) their faith in the sūtras (when they listen to their
contents);b) their being pleased with them;c) their understanding of the meaning of the sūtras
not according to their verbal expressions;d) on the contrary their grasping properly
what has been there taught; (for these reasons) the right assumption of truth is peculiar
to these (Bodhisattvas).But who are those creatures to whom the sūtra has already referred
and are known and seen by the Tathāgata only? p. 23, l. 2. 4. The sūtra says that the results
acquired by those bodhisattvas are known by the Tathāgata, they are not inferred, but
intuitively perceived, not seen by the corporeal eye. In order to make this point clear
the A. comments:

13. The qualities (referred to above) of these bodhisattvas are not inferred by the Buddhas
on account of the results they bring about, but they are (directly) ascertained by them, on
account of the knowledge (peculiar to the Buddhas) and descended from the vow originally
made. The Buddha has so said (in the passage here considered of the sūtra) in order to refute
(the possibility) of such a statement on the part of those who desire to obtain profit
and honours (and proclaim themselves to be holy men).

14. The grasping of the Law (as expounded in the sūtras etc.) is such that one should not repose
on it (when one has possessed its meaning), but at the same time conform to it; it should
then (be taken and) rejected as a raft (which is useful until one reaches the other shore,
but is abandoned when one has reached it], This is said to be the hidden implication
inherent in the Law (which states that the dharma should be at the same time embraced and
abandoned).[End of chapter 6]But now another doubt is possible: if, as stated before, the
Buddha should not be viewed from the perfection of his corporeal signs, because Buddhahood
is not produced, how is it, then, that in the scriptures it is affirmed that the Buddha
has realized the supreme illumination and that he then preached it? This traditional view
would contradict what is here affirmed viz, that there is no illumination to be realized,
nor any Law to be preached. Commenting upon p. 24, l. 1 fr. the A. goes on to say:

15. By the fact of being apparitional, the apparitional body is not really the Buddha, nor any
Law has been taught by it; on the contrary it has been taught that no dharma can ever be
grasped in either way, viz, either (as dharma or as non-dharma as stated before) and that
it is therefore inexpressible because it transcends the path of words.[End of chapter 7]But
though the Law cannot be grasped nor taught, still it is not unreal, it exists. (In fact
the sūtra says: tat kiṃ manyase, subhūte, yaḥ kaścit kulaputra etc. 24, l. 10 ff.].

16. The grasping of that dharma (for oneself) and its teaching (to others) is not useless, because
one accumulates by it a (great) quantity of merit; it is merit in so far as it is not
(taken as) the support of illumination (because when the text speaks of skandha of merit,
the word: skandha, has not here the sense of shoulder viz, of that which carries something,
but that of accumulation, heap); on the other hand both the grasping of the dharma and
its teaching can support the illumination.Therefore the sūtra immediately adds that the
supreme illumination is derived from this text p. 25, 1.4 ato nirjāta.

17. The accomplishment of merits (which is derived from the grasping of the dharma and from
its teaching to others, gātham udgṛhya parebhyo deśayet p. 25, l. 3) is the summit as the
cause by which one obtains what is essential (bodhi – viz. dhārmakāya - here called essential
because it is not produced, asaṃskṛta), then, in so far the other body than this (viz.
nirmāṇa-kāya) is born out of it and, last, since it shows the uniqueness of the qualities
of the Buddha (as is indicated in the sūtra when it states that these are the dharmas of
the Buddha, p. 25, l. 8).[End of chapter 8]The sūtra states that all saintly persons are defined
as being beyond the conditioned, asaṃskṛtaprabhāvita (p. 24, l. 9); but, on the other
hand, the scriptures tell us that the srota-āpanna etc. obtain the fruit of their conduct,
Is not this a contradiction? No, for the reason explained in the same sūtra, p. 26, l.
8.

