38. This behaviour (viz. intended to grasp the Law) causes the spiritual ripeness of oneself;
the other (viz. to explain it to others) causes the spiritual ripeness of the other creatures
(cf. p. 33, l. 3). Therefore one kind of merit is superior to the other on account of
its intrinsic greatness, as well as of the great time it requires to be accumulated.[End
of chapter 14](In stanza 36 mention was made of the effects connected with this practice,
of the right behaviour (pratipatti).Now one may ask which are these effects connected with
the Law? They are explained in the following three stanzas.

39. a) The character of not being accessible (to common people, acintya p. 33, l. 14),b) the
uniqueness, (in so far as it is not common to śrāvakas, atulyo, ibid.),c) its being resorted
to by great men, viz. those who have embraced the great vehicle, agrayāna-saṃprasthitānām
p. 33, l. 15-16),d) difficulty to he heard, na hi sakyam śrotum p. 34, l. 5,e) the capacity
to develop to the utmost (pure) elements (viz, the meritorious tendencies) up to the
extreme, acintyena... puṇyaskandhena p. 34,1. nābodhisattvapratijñaih... dhārayitum, p.34,
1.6-7.

40. f) the capacity of grasping (exactly) the supreme Law, g) the capacity of purifying the
place where the Law was preached, a place worthy of worship, api tu khalu... bhaviṣyanti p.
34, I. 9-12.[End of chapter 15] h) the capacity of clearing away ill impurities, yāni ca
teṣām p. 34, l. 17-19; i) the quick realization of the mystic knowledge (abhijñā), ahhijānāmy
aham p. 34, l. 20 ff.

41. k) a great ripeness of the perfections to he experi:nced in the various worlds, sacet punaḥ,
Subhūte, teṣām... pratikāṃkṣitavyaḥ p. 35, 1.12:17; all these are said to he the effects
of the behaviour in the Law.[End of chapter 16]How is it that on this very subject Subhūti
puts in another question, though the Buddha has already stated that there are three kinds
of right behaviour? P. 35.

42. If, when one practises the right behaviour, one assumes: “I am a bodhisattva” (or “I am
practising the Law” or “I subdue my mind”), this is called obstruction of mind (because in
reality there is no bodhisattva): mind should repose nowhere (apratiṣṭhitam).Now one may
contend: in the sūtra it is written that there is no bodhisattva; but, then, if there is no
bodhisattva, how could the Buddha Sākyamuni practise at the time of Dīpaṃkara?

43. Since it was then prophesied by Dīpaṃkara that I should have become a Buddha in the future,
I then did not practise, at the time of Dīpaṃkara, the supreme practice (because if I
had then acquired the illumination, no prophecy could have heen made concerning me. Moreover
when a bodhisattva makes the vow to become a Buddha, then, if he thinks that there is no
illumination, this implies that there are no Buddhas - and this is a wrong assumption of
nonexistence. In order to avoid this erroneous assumption the sūtra states that the Buddha
is the real absolute, bhūtatathatā , p. 37, l. 3, where bhūta means “not false” and tathatā
that “it cannot become another or change”. If, on the contrary, one thinks that illumination
is realised, this is a false statemont, vitatha p. 37, l. 7); in fact illumination
is equal to the practice (in the sense that there is nothing which can he practised, just
as there is no such dharma as illumination which can he realised; if illumination could he
ohtained) in that case it would not he real, being something produced.But is this not a complete
negation of the possibilities of reaching perfect illumination? The sūtra replies:
“what is realized by the Buddha is neither true nor false”, viz. na satyaṃ na mṛṣā p. 37,
l. 13.

44. In so far (as all dharmas) are characterized as being devoid of any proper character, the
dharmas are qualified as being not false, Therefore all dharmas are like the dharmas of
the Buddhas (p. 77, l. 13, viz. bhūtatathatā) and so their character is that of being devoid
of existence.What is the meaning of the words upetakāyo mahākāyo? “possessed of body, with
a great body” p. 37, l. 15.

45. On account of having a dharma-body, the Buddha is said to be similar to a man; on account
of the absence of the two impediments (viz. the intellectual and moral impediments), his
(body) is all-pervading.

46. But this body is also said to he “a great body”, because it is possessed of a greatness
of qualities. The Buddha is also spoken of as being without a body, akāya at p. 37, l. 17,
because his is a body of the non-existence [viz, asaṃskṛta-tathatā).Now the douht may arise:
if there are no bodhisattvas, then there is no perfect illumination realized by the Buddha,
there are no creatures to lead to nirvâna and no paradises; what would, then, he the
scope of the vow of the bodhisattva to help the beings to enter nirvāna or to make them think
of paradise? The following stanzas answer this doubt.

47. a) The inability to understand properly the dharmadhātu, b) the idea that one may lead creatures
to nirvāṇa (p. 37, l. 20) and c) the opinion of purification (as leading to) Buddha-fields
(p. 38, 1. 6) such (assumptions) as these are wrong views.

48. The man who concentrates his intelligence on ail dharmas either of the (common) creatures
or of the bodhisattvas (referring to sūtra p. 38, l. 9) and recognizes them as devoid of
any self, this man, he he an unworthy man or he he a saint, is called an intelligent man,
(a bodhisattva).[End of chapter 17]If one becomes enlightened only in so far as one does
not see any dharma, then the Buddhas do not see any dharma. But this does not imply that the
Buddha has no eyes (p. 38, l. 12 ff.):

49. Although there is no perception of a dharma, this does not mean that (the Buddha) has no
eyes; because his eye is fivefold and it sees the different errors.

50. In so far as the various erroneous ideations are excluded from mindfnlness, their series
(or flux as hinted by the sūtra: citta-dhāra ... bhāṣita p. 39, l. I1) has no stand whatever,
(because past, future and present, in which that continuity shoùld develop, are not existent);
therefore they are said to he false or wrong.[End of chapter 18]But why does the
sūtra insert here, p. 39, l. 15, p. 40, l. 7, a new example concerning the accumulation of
merits? One may in fact contend: if there is no such a thing as a flux of mental moments,
the merit also which is accumulated would implicitely be impossible. If this merit is a
false assumption, how then could virtue be realized? The reply is that there is no such thing
as a flux of mental statuses; but this does not mean that accumulation of merit is to
be avoided.

51. It should be known that there is no falsity in the accumulation of merit, in so far as this
merit is a support of right understanding. Therefore, in order to explain the significance
of this merit, there is another example concerning that very merit, (bahu puṇyaskandha
p.: 40, l. 1, where skandha is certainly not taken in the sense of constitutive element,
u padan askandha, because this would never be the support of right knowledge)[End of chapter
19]But now one may urge: if the Buddha is unoonditioned, asaṃskṛta, how then is it stated
that he is possessed of the lower and superior signs of the great man? In order to reply
to this question the sūtra says that the Buddha is not seen as the completion of bodily
forms, rupakāyapariniṣpattyā p.40, l. 9 ff. nor as perfection of the signs of the great man
(lakṣaṇasaṃpadā p.40, l. 13). Here, as said in the commentary, rūpa should be understood
as anuvyañjana viz, the 84 minor signs. The Buddha replies that rūpakāyapariniṣpatti is
in fact apariniṣpatti and that lakṣaṇasaṃpat is alakṣaṇasaṃpat. What does this mean?

52-53. The completion of the dharmakāya is not said to consist in the (appearance of the) secondary
signs (= rūpakaya), nor is it the perfection of the signs of the great man, because
that (perfection of dharmakāya) is considered as the absence of any body 1) (p. 40, n. 8-12);
on the other hand since both these perfections (rūpakāyapariniṣpatti and lakṣaṇasaṃpat)
are not distinct from the dharmakāya itself, (one should not think) that those two perfections
are not the Tathāgata; (the sūtra) says once more “perfection” because their (co)existence
(is indicative of the fact that) the existence of those two (as two contraries)
has been transcended.[End of chapter 20](But now one may ask: if in the Buddha those two perfections
are absent, then how is the teaching of the Buddha possible? p. 40, l. 17 ff.).

54. Like the Buddha, the teaching of him (the Buddha) also cannot be said to exist: the teaching
is imagined to be twofold (viz. words and meaning, which is hinted at by the repetition
of the expression dharmadeśanā dharmadeśanā in the sūtra, p. 41, l. 2). (The sūtra adds
that there is no such thing as the teaching of the doctrine, dharmadesanā) because the teaching,
being not distinct from the dharmakāya, has no character of its own.But then, one
may object, if there is no Buddha as the Teacher, then, evenhis teaching, being identified
with the dharmakāya, will not exist. Who is the man who believes in such a deep theory? The
sūtra therefore states: na te sattvā nāsattva etc., p. 41, l. 7.

55. It is not that there are not those who believe in the depth of the things to be taught or
of their teacher. They are neither sattva, beings, nor asattva, non beings: (as beings are
here intended) those who are devoid of the characters of the saints (ārya), but possessed
of those of the profane - pṛthagjana and as non-beings those who possess sainthood. (This
means that as regards profaneness (pṛthagjanatva) beings are asattva; but having regard
to sainthood they are not asattva. Therefore when the Buddha speaks of asattva non-being,
he does so referring to the profane, but when he speaks of a non-asattva, this he does referring
to the saints).[End of chapter 21]If, then, there is no such thing as the supreme
illumination why then does the sūtra continully mention the supreme illumination? The s û
t r a replies: nāsti sa etc. p. 41, l. 12.

56-57. The illumination is to be known as supreme (p. 41, l. 14) because there is not the smaUest
dharma (aṇur api dharmah, p. 41, l. 13) (which can transcend it); (this depends on the
fact that) in the absolute (dharmadhātu) there is no possibility of further growth; on
the contrary, there is complete equality of purity (p. 41, l. 16-18). It depends also on its
proper character (viz. no ego, abso1ute stillness which does not imply any gradation),
and on its being the supreme means (in so far as aU good dharmas are there completely perfected
and there is no perfection, saṃpatti, of good dharmas except in illumination).What is
the meaning of the good dharmas referred to by the sūtra p. 41, l. 19? Is this not contradictory
with the statement that there is no dharma? (57, vv. b-d).In so far as there is no
dharma by being possessed of defilement there cannot either be such a thing (as its opposite
viz.) a good dharma. Therefore this dharma is called the good dharma (because its nature
is absolutely, not relatively, good, atyantakuśala)[End of chapters 22-23]But if good
dharmas are so understood, as conducive to illumination, then the dharma which is taught,
the teaching, being avyākṛta, cannot he conducive to illumination. The doubt is out of place,
as shown in the following stanza:

