58. Though the teaching is avyākrta, it must not he considered as non-conducive to the illumination.
Therefore only this jewel of the teaching is superior to any other jewel.So the merit
which is derived from this gnosis is incomparably superior to any other merit as stated
in the sūtra p. 42, l. 4 ff.

59. As regards (the fourfold determination of difference in merit concerning) number, power,
kind and connection, there is nothing in this world which, thoroughly examined, can he taken
as an object of comparison with it. (refers to p. 42, l. 6 with full list at p. 35, l.
10).[End of chapter 24]One may urge: if the nature of dharma is pure identity, according
to p. 41, l. 16, then there would he nobody to lead to it, nor anybody who could he led; this
would contradict the statement of the Buddha that his aim is the liberation of beings.
In order to meet this objection the sūtra says: nāsti ... parimocitaḥ p. 42, l. 10.

60. Because the creatures are identical with the absolute, no creature is liherated by the Victorious
Ones, in as much as the elements composing the illusory person (skandha) along with
names, (viz. nāmakāya) are not outside the absolute. Suppose that it were affirmed that
within the skand has there is a soul to he liberated; this would amount to saying that there
is a being (sattva), and therefore the sūtra adds: ātmagrāha – agrāha p. 42, l. 13.

61. If one maintains the existence of a dharma whatsoever, one commits the same mistake as that
of asserting the existence of a self (ātman). If (the existence) of a creature (to be)
liberated is admitted, this is considered to he the (erroneous) admission of something which
is no object of admission.[End of chapter 25]It may now he urged: You said that the Tathāgata
cannot he seen as a perfection of signs (laksaṇasaṃpat) because he is dharmakāya,
the ahsolute; but nevertheless this dharmakiāya, which is essentially the Tathāgata, can he
inferred from that perfection of signs which make us know his perfection of merits. Therefore
the sātra adds: tat kiṃ manyase... p. 42, l. 17.

62. Not indeed on account of the visible body can the Tathiigata he inferred, since He is only
the ahsolute (dharmakāya); the Universal Ruler (cakravartin) (who is equally possessed
of the characteristic signs of the great man) cannot he taken for the Tathāgata (as could
happen if the mere presence of the signs is taken as indicative of the Buddha).That perfection
of signs is certainly the maturation of the merits accumulated, but this is not the cause
of supreme illumination: because, as concluded by the sūtra p. 43, l. 3 ff.:

63. The dharmakāya is not said to he obtained by a perfect accumnlation of merits, the maturation
of which are the (thirtytwo) signs of the great man; in fact the means (in both cases)
are different; (viz. gnosis being the very essence of dharmakāya, that dharmakāya cannot
he identical with merits).Two gāthās, giving a resumé of these statements, follow in the
sūtra, p. 43, l. 6-9.

64. The profane cannot know the Buddha, because they only see his figure and hear his voice,
In fact the ahsolute (dharmakāya), which is the only reality, transcends the field of discursive
intelligence.[End of chapter 26]Somebody may argue that in so far as merits are not
conducive to illumination, the meritorious deeds of the bodhisattva would have no result.
In order to eliminate this doubt the sūtra answers: tat kiṃ manyase etc. p. 43, l. 10.

65. Even so, that merit is in no way lost nor its fruit suppressed; even if one possesses the
supreme patience consisting in the realization that all dharmas are not born, no annihilation
of merits (p. 43 last line p. 44 first line) follows from it, because one has obtained
the realization of the spotless reality.[End of chapter 27]

66. Therefore in order to explain again that merit (is not in vain), another example is taught:
(p. 43, l. 18 ff.); but since this merit do es not lead to a retribution (because illumination
is asaṃskṛta, unconditioned), any acceptance of it do es not hring with it a wrong
grasping of it (udgraha) as something existent; (this in fact would he a wrong view, sāsrava).[End
of chapter 28]But it may he argued that, if the Bodhisattvas do not take upon themselves
the fruit of their merits, how can this fruit he known and how can the visible activity
of the Buddhas he explained? p. 44, l. 7 ff. api tu khalu ... yaḥ kaścid evaṃ vadet
...

67-68. The miraculous fruit of that merit which they accumulate and their conversion of creatures
is the work which the Buddhas accomplish in the (ten) quarters, viz. (everywhere and
for ever) automatically (anābhogena).Their (apparent) (actions such as) going, and coming
are accomplishad by miraculous emanations; but in reality the Buddhas are for ever motionless.
Their abiding in the absolute (dharmadhātu) is stated to he neither identity with nor
diversity from it.[End of chapter 29]What then is the meaning of the example of the atoms
which follows in the sūtra p. 44, l. 12 ff. ?

69. When the sūtra refers as an example to the reducing of the universe into a dust of atoms
1), this example is meant to make clear the same idea. The expression “reducing into dust”
is intended to show (how the) destruction of the defilement should be understood.

70. The fact that there is no condition either of mass (saṃcaya) (p. 44, l. 17) of atoms nor
of matter, indicates that things are not unity. The fact that a condition of collection exists,
indicates that there is no diversity. (Just as when the atoms are reduced into dust
they are neither identical with the thing they formed nor different, because the parts and
the whole cannot be conceived one without the other, though they represent two different
conditions of being, so also the state of Buddhahood is neither identical with the dharmadhātu
nor different).p. 45, l. 7).But how is it that the profane thinks to grasp what in reality
cannot be grasped? (sa ca bālapṛthagjanair udgrhītaḥ p. 45 l. 7)

71. Since the profane possesses only a wordly knowledge, he grasps all this, i.e, the nction
of a mass or of matter referred to in the above example, in a different, way (from what it
really is); it is in fact impossible that the illumination be obtained by the suppression
of both, the ego (ātman) and the elements of existence (dharma), because both do not exist
(and therefore cannot be suppressed).[End of chapter 30]So it is not the suppression of
either the atom or of the elements of existence which leads to illumination, but the suppression
of the wrong views concerning them. (p. 45, l. 11-12 yā sā... ātmadṛṣṭis... etc.].

72. Therefore both the view (viz. the affermative assumption of the existence of the ego or
of the elements, dharma) as well as the non-view, (viz. the negation of something) derive
from the assumption of something unreal or wrongly conceived. Both views (being originated
from wrong imagination) are a subtle cover (āvaraṇa) which is eliminated by the knowledge
of truth (as propounded in the sūtra).But then the sūtra adds: evam... jñātavyā... adhimoktavyāḥ
p. 45, l. 14 ff. What is the meaning of these words?

73. (Those words) indicates that that cover should be eliminated by the twofold knowledge (viz.
the ordinary and the transcendental) and by concentration upon it,[End of chapter 31](Anyhow
the merit derived from the gift of this gnosis leading to the realization of truth
is immensely great. This is stated in the sūtra p. 45, l. 19 ff. with the purpose of making
it sure that) such merit is not not indestructible, because it has been revealed by the
emanations of the Buddha, (though the Tathāgata rests forever in his transcendent inactivity).
Why then the sūtra asks kathaṃ saṃprakāsayet? p. 46, l. 3.4.

74. When the Tathāgatas preach (the Law) (for the benefit of the creatures), they do not preach
the (existence) of a self saying “I am a miraculous emanation”; and therefore, because
they do not preach the self, this preaching is excellent.But is it not stated that the Buddhas
preach without end the Law through infinite emanations (nirmāṇa)? How then can they
abide in a nirvanic condition?

