18. No dharma can be grasped nor can it be taught by words because no one (from srota-āpanna
... up to arhat) can grasp a fruit as one’s own (on account of the true nature of everything
being asaṃskṛta, asaṃskṛtaprabhāvita, and of the erroneous implications of an eventual
assumption that there is a partaker in that fruit like the ātman etc.] Since he is free of
both impediments (the moral defilements and the intellectual defilements), in Subhūti both
kinds of defilement are absent (araṇa, as is stated at p. 26, l. 12).[End of chapter 9]This
statement seems to contradict the other contained in some scriptures that Śākyamuni received
the Law from Dīpaṃkara. In fact such a contradiction does not exist, because, as the
sūtra tells us, p. 26, l. 18, there is no doctrine which the Buddha received from Dīpamkara.

19. Sākyamuni did not receive by means of words any (instruction how to) realize the doctrine
from the Buddha Dīpamkara. Therefore it is proved that in its realization there is nothing
which was grasped or was expressed in words.But if it is so, how is it possible to say
that the bodhisattva can partake of the Buddha fields (buddha-kṣetra) or be considered king
of the Law? A reply to this question is contained in p. 27, l. 1.

20. It is impossible to be a partaker of the Buddha fields, because they are a mere denomination
which is the mental outflow of the Buddha; on account of their not having any material
consistency (from the point of view of the absolute truth) and of the eminency which they
imply, the arrangement (vyūha) of these fields is said to be essentially a non-arrangement
(avyūha).Cittam should always be apratiṣṭhitam, mind should repose nowhere (p. 27, l. 5).
The Buddha, king of the Law, cannot speak of himself as a Buddha, king of the Law, as if
he had grasped the Law, just as the Sumeru cannot speak of itself as being the Sumeru (p.
27, l. 9 ff.).

21. Just as the Sumeru cannot grasp itself as being the king of mountains, in the same way no
Buddha (in spite of his greatness) can grasp himself as being in the condition of fruition,
saṃbhoga (because no activity of imaginative thought is admissible in either case). In
fact it is astate characterized by the absence of any impure influx (āśrava) as well as of
karmic forces (saṃskṛta, in so far as it does not depend on any external cause).[End of
chapter 10]“This explains the statement of the sūtra that the self (ātmabhāva) is no existent
thing (bhāva) and that this non existence (abhāva) is the real self (ātmabhāva), p. 27,
l. 13·15. Now one may ask: The sūtra has already spoken of merit; how is it that it now
comes back again to the same subject? (p. 27, l. 15 ff.).

22. (The sūtra returns again to the subject of merit) in order to make manifest the varieties
in its greatness and in order to prove its peculiarity. Therefore a second instruction (so
that faith in it may increase) is here given by means of an example in order to show that
the foIlowing exceeds the previous one. (With a different emphasis, in so far as in the
previous case the Buddha has spoken of merits which are not a support of illumination and
now of a merit which can support illumination). Which is this gift that can he a support
to illumination, that is which is the supreme merit? The reply is given in the foIlowing stanzas.[End
of chapter 11]

23-25. The gift of the Law is superior to any other gift, becausea) it makes worthy the two
(viz. the place where the doctrine has been given i. e. preached pṛthivī-pradeśa, p. 28, l.
10, and the giver of it, i.e, the preacher of the doctrine, p. 28, l. 14 dhārayiṣyanti...
saṃprakāśayiṣyanti;[End of chapter 12]b) the fruits which are its outflow are very great,
(because in fact no dharma has ever been preached, p. 29, l. 3 ff.);c) it is the cause of
no defilement 1); (as the gift of other things, p. 29, l. 6 ff., rather it stops all sorts
of defilements);d) it surpasses the inferior merit (in so far as its aim is the realization
of supreme illumination and not the obtainment of the signs of the mahāpuruṣa. (This
would he an erroneous assumption since the dharmakāya, as has been said before, is devoid
of any sign, p. 29, l. 13 ff.);e) from the practice of those lower merits one gets as a fruit
higher pains (in so far as the practice of liberality, as a result, causes enjoyment to
be experienced by one’s own body in a future life, and that body is essentially sorrow,
while the merit derived from the gift of the Law makes us abandon numberless bodies) p. 29,
l. 19 ff;[End of chapter 13]f) its ends are difficult to he obtained (referring to na mayā
śruta-pūrvaḥ said by Subhūti p. 30, l. 8): and its meaning is the highest (referring to:
prajñāpāramitā saivāpāramitā p. 31, l. 6 ff.);g) the limits to its contents cannot be known;h)
its teachings are not common to those of the other sects (viz. the bhūtsaṃjñā p. 30,
l. 10, is peculiar only to this doctrine);i) it is profound and deep; (in so far as no wrong
opinion, viparyāsa, is found in this doctrine concerning the existence either of the
percipient or of things to he perceived, nātma-saṃjñā . .. pravartiṣyate. .. p. 30, l. 19
ff.; but in spite of this realization of non-existence, the bodhisattva does not feel any
mental fear, which is of three kinds: nottrasiṣyanti, no saṃtrasiṣyanti, na saṃtrasam āpatsyante
p. 31, l. 5);k) it is superior to the sūtras of the other schools (paraṃparamiteyam
p. 31, l. 6);l) it has a great and pure connection (with the lineage) of the Buddhas (yām
ca... tathāgata bhāṣante p. 31, l. 7-8).Therefore the merit derived from the understanding
and practice of the gnosis distinguishes itself from and it is far superior to that derived
from the mere practice of good actions etc.(But though the practice of the gnosis is painful,
nevertheless it cannot be said to be a cause of pain; this point is made clear in
the two following stanzas:)

26-27. The capacity to endure the difficult practice of the path leading to illumination is
designated as being excellent (parama-pāramitā p. 31,1. 8) because;a) it is propitious (consubstantiated
with the perfections)b) it is impossible to enumerate the merits deriving from
it;c) moreover, since in this doctrine there is no place either for the notion of a self
(which can be offended) or for that of an offence, there is in it no possibility of admitting
a condition of suffering (p. 31, l. 11 ff.);d) this practice of the path to illumination
is (in fact) accompanied by satisfaction, because, being compassion, it does not cause
sorrow as fruit.It may be that somebody, on account of the sufferings implicit in the practice
of the six perfections, gives up the vow of realizing the supreme illumination. In
order to clear up this doubt the sūtra states that one should abandon all sorts of notions
etc. (sarvasaṃjñāṃ vivarjayitvā etc. p. 31 last line p. 32 first line), because only a man
who has not formulated that vow can be deterred by the sufferings of that practice, not
he who has formulated the vow and, therefore, has implicitly abandoned all notions and is
apratiṣṭhitacitta, viz. with mind resting nowhere. Such is the purpose of the following stanza.

28. In fact a strong effort is to be made in the effectuation of not renouncing the vow of reaching
illumination; so also in the mastery of the perfection of patience (kṣāntiparamitā)
and in the means instrumental to that (viz. realization of illumination, the perfection
of liberality, etc. all depending on the mind not resting anywhere).This statement of the
mind reposing nowhere (apratiṣṭhitacitta) as a fundamental quality of the bodhisattva, seems
to be contradicted by what the sūtra states, viz. that the vow of attaining illumination
and the practice of the pāramitās should be followed in order to benefit beings. Therefore
the mind should at least repose on the thought that beings exist.The stanza 29 solves this
doubt.

29. The practice of the proper behaviour (pratipatti) is to he understood as being useful to
the creatures in so far as it is the cause of (their henefit); but it should also he understood
as being devoid of any assumption implying that those creatures have the character
of real things, sarva-sattvānām arthāya 32, l. 9).But what is then the real character of the
beings?

30. That thing which we call a creature (in reality is nothing but) a denomination (applied
to the synthesis of) some components (skandha); (therefore it is a non-notion, asaṃjñā p.
32, l. 10 and devoid of any essence). These two notions viz. ātman, as well as dharma, completely
disappear in the Victorious One; therefore (creatures and dharmas as well), are not
existent for the Buddhas in so far as these are possessed of the vision of reality.But if
that is really so and no practice really exists, then does this mean that there is no cause
of the fruit to he realized, viz. the illumination or, in other words, that the path is
no cause of the fruit? Certainly not, because the sūtra says: bhūtavādī etc. p. 32, l. 11).

31. The path does not repose on the notion of its being a cause of a fruit consisting in Buddhahood
(which would then he produced: saṃskṛta), but it is nevertheless the instrumental
cause of its fruit; because the Buddhas (who proclaimed this doctrine) tell always the truth.
This statement of truth by them is fourfold:

32. Viz.a) the promise (to become a Buddha),b, c) the teaching contained in the Lesser and the
teaching contained in the Greater Vehicle,d) that contained in prophecies delivered by
the Buddha which never turn out to he false.This explains the fourfold expression of the sūtra:
bhūtavādī, satyavādī, tathāvādī, ananyathāvādī.But how is it possible to say that the
very teaching of the Tathāgata is such that it cannot he said to he either true (satyam)
or false (mṛṣā)? (p. 32, l. 14).

33. Therefore since it does not reach anything (as a real existent thing, in so far as there
is nothing which exists behind these words), this teaching is not true; it cannot either
he said to he untrue, in so far as it is in agreement with (the fact that illumination is
reached); it is taught so as to serve as a counteragent to the inclination of taking words
according to their literal meaning (as if they corresponded to an entity). (Therefore there
is no contradiction when the sūtra says: bhūtavādī tathāgata, and afterwards adds: na satyam,
na mṛṣā).Now a doubt is possible; if the saints are, as has been told, asaṃskrta-prabhāvitā
(where asaṃskṛta = tathatā), then, how is it that Buddhahood is realized by a mind
reposing nowhere (apratiṣṭhitacitta)? When illumination is realized a mind should repose
somewhere (pratiṣṭhitacitta), Moreover, if this illumination is eternal and all pervading,
then, how is it that sometimes it may he realized and sometimes not?

34. Though the absolute (tathatā) is always and everywhere, still it cannot he realized by those
who, on account of ignorance, have their mind reposing somewhere (pratiṣṭhita) but, on
the contrary, it is realized by the others whose mind, on account of right knowledge, reposes
nowhere (apratiṣṭhita).(This is further explained by an example p. 32,1.14 ff.).

35. Ignorance is like darkness, knowledge is said .to be like light. The counteragent (of erroneous
assumptions, here the example of the sun destroying darkness) and its opposite (here
the example of darkness) are respectively conducive to realization of truth and to loss
of it.

36. Now it is told what kind of merit is derived from such and such practice of a right behaviour
and of what kind of (karmic) effects this practice of a right behaviour in the Law consists.

37. Concerning the right behaviour, as regards the doctrine consisting of sentences (expounded
in the sūtra), it can be of three kinds: one may grasp the doctrine, one may he learned
in it, one spreads it explaining it to others (udgrahiṣyati, dhārayiṣyati, vācayiṣyati) p.
32, l. 21. As regards the meaning, it can he obtained either from another or by oneself,
viz. by listening to it or meditating on it,

